Going to undergraduate school, the head of the
astronomy department asked me who was John Jason
Nassau, or Jason John Nassau, I guess.
Invited me to come and work at the observatory, for
what reason I do not know. Anyway, I did during my
junior and senior years there, and when I
graduated, he asked me what I was going to do with
myself, and since I didn't know, he offered me an
assistantship at Case in the astronomy
department to get my master's degree. And I did
that, and then went to work for NACA. And
eventually NACA became NASA, and they were
interested in astronomy, so they sent me back to
get a Ph.D. at Case in astronomy. So you were at
what, Lewis Research Center? I went to the Lewis
Flight Propulsion Laboratory. And what did you do
while you were there? I worked for a fellow by the
name of George M. Lowe. He was my section head. And I
worked on supersonic aerodynamics, both
theoretical and laboratory.
What did you do your PhD thesis on? I did my PhD
thesis on peculiar and metallic line A-stars,
trying to detect them with a Schmidt objective
prism images. And who did you do it under? It was
done under Jason Nassau. All right. So you got your
PhD. What happened then? I got my PhD in 1963. And in
1964, there was a need for somebody to come to NASA
headquarters and take responsibility for
programming planetary astronomy at NASA
headquarters. I was invited to do so by a Dr. Erner
Liddell, who was the chief scientist for the lunar
and planetary program at NASA headquarters. Do
you have any idea how he found you? I understand
later that he found me through Nancy Roman. I had
been on Nancy Roman's astronomy advisory
committee since 1958, I believe. As the Lewis
representative? As the Lewis representative.
When you got to headquarters, as I recall, that was
about the time that there was the first little
crunch in funding. And then your budget got bigger
for a number of years. Is that correct, or would you
tell us what happened?
I was unaware of the initial crunch in funding
because I was just coming in, and the numbers that
I'd seen were so tremendous to me, more like a
fortune than in French. The budget did get bigger
with time as planetary astronomy took on more and
more importance. I don't recall right at the
moment when the first significant budget crunch
came after that. I'd have to look at the record.
Yeah. Well, that's 10 years after I came.
Let me ask a more general question. What do you
think is the most important thing you did while you
were
headquartered? I think the most important, well,
it is a very difficult question to answer for a
couple of reasons. When I came to headquarters, it
was the feeling of the division director Mr. Oren
Nix at that time, that ground-based planetary
astronomy had seen its better days. And I was
informed when I arrived here that he would like to
say that he would give me some sort of a permanent
position here, but all he could give me was a
temporary position because planetary astronomy
was just about terminated. soon everything was
going to be done from spacecraft and there was no
going to be no need for anything to be done from the
ground and he was looking for somebody to come in
and basically close out the program that of course
never happened the importance of planetary
astronomy while low for a while there became more
and more significant and finally was if I may say
so, competitive with the planetary spacecraft.
And I think a lot of this was due to the fact that the
instrumentation we had available, the
techniques we had available, and the interest of
the professional astronomers turned towards
planetary observations. When I came on board, it
was very difficult to get anybody to make
planetary observations. and you'd go around
almost begging people, if we give you some money,
you know, in return for this, would you make an
observation for us? Well, this changed with some
of the initial successes in the flight program. It
also changed not only because of that, but because
instrumentation became available that we were
able to turn onto planetary problems that people
hadn't used for planetary problems before, and
they suddenly discovered that this was something
that was scientifically interesting. The other
thing that happened, well, I would say,
therefore, that the resurgence or actually not a
resurgence, but a genuine growth in planetary
observations from the ground was probably one of
the most exciting things that happened during the
time I was here. And I would say today, as has been
true for probably the last 15 years or so, the
amount of research we can do in the planetary area
or in the solar system area is limited more by the
number of dollars we can put into it than by the
people or the instrumentation that's available.
So it's still being a very productive aspect of the
overall program. The other thing that I was
involved with, which went along with this but I
think was also independently very valuable, was
the construction of major instrumentation
throughout the country, opening up new sites that
were not opened before. And interestingly
enough, it came about to a large extent because
the National Science Foundation, who had been the
primary
financer of development of major
instrumentation for astronomy, or for
planetary, well, for all astronomy, made, I
think, an unwritten decision that they were going
to focus their attention on certain locations.
And so the major instruments that they built, they
built in places like the Kitt Peak and Saratololo
and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory.
But they had a few specific locations that they
invested a large portion of their money in. In the
area of planetary astronomy, we had a different
objective, and that is that we needed to get major
telescopes at locations which were optimized for
planetary observations.
Now, this had at least two aspects to it, possibly
and probably even more. One aspect to it was that we
wanted to put telescopes where there were people
who had strong interest in planetary
observations.
And this led to the development of major
telescopes in Texas, in Arizona, and a couple of
other ones around. Well, Hawaii came in for a
different reason. The other one was we wanted
telescopes located for optimal planetary
observations. And getting as close to the equator
made Hawaii an extremely important location. In
particular, when Mars is closest to the south of
the celestial equator. Right. It's in the United
States. It is as close to the equator as we could get
in a available location and it was also separated
from California and Texas by in longitude by
significant distance and the advantage of this is
that if you're looking at a planet which has a
rotation period let's say similar to the earth or
even one like Jupiter that doesn't have it similar
you can see a different side of the planet from a
site that's located at a sizable difference in
longitude. Also, the weather patterns differ
significantly enough so that you want to separate
your telescopes significantly in longitude. We
have run planetary patrols where we've actually
run telescopes in places like Australia and
India, as well as in Hawaii and throughout the
United States. So longitude distribution is a
very important thing in planetary observations.
ask you something that's a little out of whack
here, but I don't want to miss it. Two-part
question. Do you think planetary astronomy was
considered second-rate astronomy by the, quote,
astronomical establishment in the USA when you
started, and do you think it still is? The answer to
both those questions is yes. I think it has
received a great deal of respectability And it is
now looked at with some considerable respect by
many different types of astronomers. But to many
astronomers who are interested in stellar and
galactic work, it's still considered a
second-rate citizen. The reason I asked that was
your comment about trying to get people, you know,
here's the money, will you observe? And they turn
you down. I had exactly that experience. Yes. And
it's frustrating as all get-out. Right. And we had
it for years. Let me ask you two questions here,
because there are two important people I can't
interview. One is Kuiper and one is Harlan Smith,
and so I have to go around and ask people about them.
So let's start with the grand old man, Kuiper,
Gerard Peter Kuiper. What was he like?
Well, he talked a lot. He talked a lot and had an
unlimited number of ideas, many of which were not
good, but many of which were very good. And on the
average, I think he had some wonderful ideas. He
was a great promoter. He was a great seller of
Gerard Kuiper. He had unlimited interest in
astronomy, but especially in planetary
astronomy. And he was a real salesman. He was a real
innovator. Our whole reason for going over to
Hawaii was Gerard Kuiper. That was his idea
originally, wasn't it? Yes. In fact, he did the
first work on it. How did he get frozen out of that?
When NASA decided to put a significant-sized
telescope over in Hawaii,
Gerard Carper was very interested in doing it.
However, there was some concern expressed that
his empire was growing bigger than we felt that he
could appropriately handle, based to a large
extent on the fact that we had worked with him in
Arizona. He had built a telescope in Arizona, but
his ideas were always going on and on, new places,
new sites, and we didn't think at that time that he
might put as much personal attention into the
Hawaii telescope as we would like to see it have. He
wanted to operate it basically as a field station
of Arizona, and he also wanted to use a relatively
small telescope. We were interested in a slightly
larger telescope. Here I'm talking of the
difference between something on the order of 82
inches versus, he was talking 60 inches. He wanted
to duplicate Tucson telescope over in Hawaii. At
that time, we also involved a fellow from Harvard,
Don Menzel, in the possibility of operating a
telescope in Hawaii.
How did you approach the University of Hawaii? At
the time, they had no astronomers. They had some
solar astronomers, which is a different world
than we're used to. How did that get going? Did you
do it, or did someone else do it? In those days, you
must remember that most of the initiatives that
took place were generated here.
Unlike the National Science Foundation, who
responds to the community, NASA has always, or at
least for a long time, been in the position of
initiating programs. And it was decided in NASA
that we needed a major telescope at an excellent
site
separated in longitude and in weather pattern
from the ones that were already available in Texas
and in California. Hawaii looked wonderful. And
it had the original tests on Hawaii that were made
by Gerard Kuiper with his small telescope located
over on Mauna Kea. showed that the telescope, that
that would be a very good site. Also, he did a very,
he, Dr. Kuiper, did a very excellent job of selling
Hawaii as a good site. We then tried to figure out
what would be the best approach in developing a
site over there. And as I said, we talked to Dr.
Kuiper and we talked to Don Menzel at Harvard. We
also, when I say we here, it's not so much me, it's
more Erna Liddell, called in John Jeffries from
Hawaii, who, although they had relatively little
experience with telescopes at that time, were
interested in getting involved in telescopes.
And John Jeffries, as you know, is also quite a good
salesman.
The decision was made for several reasons, but
mainly because we felt that Hawaii would place
more personal interest in a telescope there than
either Harvard or Arizona.
The decision was made to go with John Jeffries
because he was going to duplicate a Kitt Peak
telescope the 84-inch,
and he was going to make use of people with some
experience, like Hans Bosgaard and others who had
had telescope building experience. So we simply
took a chance on him. And it worked. And it worked.
Let me ask you about another character, Harlan J.
Smith. What was Smithy like? Well, Smith is also a
tremendous salesman. And when I came on board
here, he had already talked Erna Liddell and maybe
Ron Shorn and Roger Moore into having him
duplicate a telescope at the University of Texas,
a large telescope for planetary purposes. And as
was well known at that time, it was difficult to get
people to make planetary observations. And so the
fact that somebody with some clout, some
authority, and a great deal of interest and
personal responsibility here saying, let me
duplicate a telescope and put it here and use it
primarily for planetary purposes at this, what
appeared to be a very good site, was received
eagerly. back here at NASA headquarters. And when
I came on board, all the paperwork was already in
motion for the telescope at the University of
Texas. An inch to begin with. No, it was a smaller
telescope. It was a smaller telescope. Harlan
found a blank. A blank, 107-inch. And that's the
reason it went up to 107-inch. It was originally
84-inch. and basically it was going to be a
duplicate of the one that was at Kitt Peak. Same
thing that John Jeffries was going to do with
Hawaii. And then Harlan wanted to go to a different
mounting system, and then he found the blank, a
much larger blank, and came in and convinced, in
quotes, us that it wasn't going to cost us any more
money to build the larger telescope. Now, Harlan
Smith, and I got this in black and white, but he said
it many times in person, said the biggest mistake
he ever made was that he had two bids. One was for
Bowler and Chivins, which was the higher bid
initially. It was a turnkey operation that
delivered an operating working telescope. The
other one was from Westinghouse, which was like a
million dollars cheaper. And he picked
Westinghouse, and to his dying day, he regretted
it as I'm sure you still do to this day. We still do to
this day. I was observing at McDonnell at the time a
lot, and it must have been horrible for you. Well,
it was. It was horrible, and the cost went way up on
it. And finally, we had to say, okay, we, NASA
headquarters, are going to basically be the
monitor on this telescope. And it's unfortunate
for Harlan, but we said, Harlan, we just can't
leave it to you. And what we did was, let's see, it
was the vice chancellor at the University of
Texas. What was his name? I forget it offhand. No,
let's see. I know the dean of arts and sciences was
John Silver. No, no. But this was the guy one step
ahead, and I can't remember the name, but I can look
it up. And then he went into the whole system after
that. But basically, the difficulty is Harlan
made all the original contracts.
We had all kinds of problems. He had problems with
Westinghouse. Westinghouse, all kinds of
problems. The control system didn't work. And so
they said, and it was more or less saying, trust us,
trust us, trust us. We built nuclear submarines.
So we finally did two things. We finally pushed it
up above Harlan Smith University of Texas, all the
way up to the chancellor's office.
And the, I think it was vice chancellor, took
personal interest in it and attended all reviews
himself of the telescope at Westinghouse. We then
attended all reviews of the telescope at
Westinghouse. We made Westinghouse report on all
activities on, it was at least six months, I think
probably at that time, quarterly basis. Harlan
tells the story that at one time, basically, the
shell of the telescope was laying in a pit at
Westinghouse with nobody working on it. quite
possibly but we change we tried to change the whole
thing around and get Westinghouse to pay some
attention to it getting the highest well
concerned at the highest levels of NASA concerns
are the highest levels of the University of Texas
we we had these status reviews at Westinghouse. We
had the top-level Westinghouse people there at
Sunnyvale in on the reviews. We went through all
the problems. They were open to all kinds of
questions. We questioned them everything,
things that they didn't want to talk about. We went
through. We had planned tours every so often. We
finally got it straightened out, but it was a real
mess. The telescope came in way over cost. I mean,
like a million dollars over cost on the mountain.
In fact, it would have been cheaper to adopt the
bowler in general. Yeah, yeah. It would have been a
lot faster. And we finally got it built. It's
working fine, but it was a headache to get it built.
And we decided at that time that if we ever did
another telescope, we would do it in a different
manner. And we have done other telescopes in a
different manner. There was the Lake Lominden.
attempt by JPL to get about a 60-inch telescope or
something on Table Mountain, and I know I signed
off on that darn thing, and I thought it was done,
but it died lousy back in 65 or something like that.
Why did it die? I mean, JPL people wanted it at the
time. We had, I guess, the biggest planetary
astronomy group in the world.
What happened? As I understand it, the thing that
happened was a disagreement between
headquarters and Caltech.
And
the people at JPL, which is, in effect, Caltech...
Sort of. Well, that was one of the difficulties.
We would agree to build a telescope, as we did with
all our telescopes, as an instrument, but not as a
facility. That meant that we would build the
telescope, but not the building. And this was
being done through Caltech, not through JPL,
because we did build many facilities through JPL.
We'd give them the telescope, but not the
building. They went to upper management here,
went to Caltech, as I remember it, and said, look,
we'll give you one facility. Do you want the
building for that telescope, or do you want a
building on campus?"
Caltech said, we want the building on campus. And
that was the end of the telescope. I've also heard
that Caltech
was interested in building the perfect telescope
at the perfect in some indefinite future, whereas
NASA obviously wanted to know things like what's
the surface pressure on Mars, and Caltech could
care less about that. Is that true? That aspect I
don't remember at all. All I know, and it was in the
records when I got here, it was no longer an active
program under consideration, so I personally
didn't have anything to do with it, but it had been
turned down because Caltech basically said, if
that's our building, we don't want it. Well, they
had plenty of big, most of the big telescopes in the
world already. Yeah, and it was JPL that wanted the
60-inch telescope. Let's get, and I'm confused
here because the acronyms are ganging up on me, but
you had a lot to do about an infrared telescope, and
I forget what it's called, the IRTF? Yeah, the
IRTF. Okay. Back even in the 60s, there was all this
talk about the fact that that's one of the other
things. So that
has a long story. Can you summarize it in an hour or
less?
Yes, there actually is a very good two-part report
on that that came out in Science
and went into a great deal of detail in the
background of the IRTF.
I have a copy of it around here someplace. But
anyway, this was the thing. We wanted to get a light
bucket in the infrared, and that was, there was a,
let's say there was a meeting... By that you mean
not a really superb primary mirror or something,
just something to collect light and put it on a...
Originally, the astronomers said what we want is a
large aperture, large mirror light bucket for the
infrared to make infrared observations of the
planets. What's his name? Hugh Johnson at Arizona
was building metal mirror telescopes, infrared
light buckets.
Harold Johnson. Harold Johnson. And in addition,
there was one built at Caltech, Bob Layden. I think
Guido Munch was working with him on that one. And at
the time, of course, infrared detectors were very
insensitive. And they were doing an infrared sky
survey. But there was a lot of argument as to the
value of infrared observations for planetary
work. Now, if you could get resolution, that was
fine, but you didn't think you could get
resolution. There was a planetary astronomy
study
done at—oh,
what's the name of that? It was published in the
early 1960s,
and it was, I think, a location that the NSF had New
England someplace. It wasn't Woods Hole.
It was another location. I don't have a copy of
the—I have it packed away, and my stuff is in
storage, but I don't have a copy of it here. But
there was a group put together to look at the
potential of planetary astronomy, ground-based
planetary astronomy. And one of the things they
came up with was the desirability of having an
infrared telescope.
That generated our initial interest in infrared.
It was originally thought to be about a three meter
light bucket.
Then as things improved, the detectors became
better, The concept changed from a three meter
light bucket to a three meter higher quality
instrument. Although actually, when the IRTF was
built, we didn't anticipate that the mirror was
going to be as good as it was.
Now,
there was also a desire to have it in the best
possible location.
From the experience that we had in the infrared, it
looked to us as if Hawaii, Mauna Kea, was probably
the best site to put an infrared telescope. So we
started looking at Hawaii, and Jeffries had
already built the 88-inch telescope. We started
looking at that site and the University of Hawaii
to do an infrared telescope. on Mauna Kea. There
was considerable concern expressed by the
community outside
of Hawaii that we were really not doing the
appropriate analysis of capabilities and sites
if we were going to build a major infrared
telescope. This resulted in a program being
undertaken, which we did site surveys. I think we
started out with about eight sites, ended up with
something like five. Jim Westfall at Caltech
handled the actual site survey for us. The sites
included Mauna Kea, I think White Mountain,
a site in Arizona,
a site in Baja, Cerro Tololo.
There's a report that's out on it. Again, it's
filed away. When I retired in 85,
some of these things I got copies of, but they're
all stored away. And I think NASA has copies of all
the reports. Anyway, the things that were looked
at was the were the water vapor content of the
atmosphere above the site and something called
infrared noise. And I still think that they don't
understand infrared noise. We had infrared noise
monitors that were designed by Jim Westfall,
approved by Frank Lowe, and we did water vapor
studies And we did them for one full year at all of
these sites. A blind survey. The data all came in by
number, and the analysis were all made by number.
And it wasn't until the analysis were completed
that the translation of the numbers into sites
were known. But it showed that, except for some
unusual periods, the best location was Hawaii.
White Mountain looked very good, but
unfortunately, due to weather, you couldn't do a
continuous observation. They had to keep pulling
the observers off White Mountain. So Mauna Kea
became the site of favor, although many people
argued that we were making a mistake by going to
Hawaii because the cost of going up on the mountain
there was very expensive. The working conditions
were very severe. The number of legitimate
planetary astronomers were less there, and so
there was a lot of desire to go to a place like
Arizona. So I think in the actual priority rating
by an outside committee that looked at all the
results of the site surveys and every one of the
people put in a proposal and they talked about
logistics and the engineering support and the
university support and everything else, they
came up and rated Hawaii top Arizona second, and
then the other ones further on down the list. We
went to Hawaii. We originally were going to build a
fork mounting.
We did a couple of things. One of them is we put
together a committee of three people, Frank Lowe,
Fred Gillette,
Neugebauer, Gary Neugebauer, to come up with the
design of a telescope, rough design of a
telescope.
They would like to have a polar mounting
with a north pole and a south pole.
Hawaii wanted to go with a fork.
Finally, Hawaii won out. We went with the design of
a fork. However, the fork design could not be shown
to satisfy the needs of the infrared observers,
and we finally went with the floor mounting. So you
have enough room at the bottom end to mount their
equipment? It was stability more than anything.
Repeatability. The example of the 120-inch. I
mean, you have hysteresis and other serious
problems. You have flexure and gravitational
deformation of the telescope mount. And even
though Charlie Jones, who did the design, tried to
convince us that it would There was enough
question about it, so they changed the design to
the other. And that's important, because a lot of
these infrared sources are not visible when you
look through an eyepiece, so you've got to know
where you're pointing. You've got to know where
you're pointing. But there was another reason we
finally changed the mount design. It had nothing
to do with the mount. It had to do with a cracked
mirror.
And the problem that we had there was in an attempt
to save money, NASA came up with a mirror that had
been purchased for testing, not for the space
telescope, but for testing, for figuring out the
space telescope mirror. And we were given that
mirror and we're going to use it for the IRTF.
Unfortunately, on the grinding table at Kitt
Peak, for one holiday, it developed a crack,
and we were forced to go to another replacement
mirror.
Being forced to go to the replacement mirror
provided us with an unexpected additional amount
of time to finish the telescope, which was enough
time to change the design of the mount. You might
say, why this particular concern? We were trying
to finish the IRTF in time to make measurements of
the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn and of the
planets themselves prior to the launch of the
Voyager spacecraft. That was probably the main
driver
on the telescope schedule. When the mirror
cracked, we were no longer able to meet that
schedule. And even though there were some
questions about the design of the mount prior to
that, the desire to meet that schedule, because we
had promised Congress that we were going to meet
that schedule, said, okay, maybe the design mount
won't work, but to meet the schedule, we'll go with
it. When the mirror cracked and we had to go back and
replace the mirror, start over again, that gave us
a forced delay in the schedule. that forced delay
in the schedule was sufficient to allow us to go
back and redesign them out of the telescope. Who
was the managing institution for the IRT at the
University of Hawaii? University of Hawaii. And
who runs it now? How is it run now? Okay, it is still
run by the University of Hawaii under contract to
NASA. It is a NASA facility, completely a NASA
facility. NASA owns and but operated for us by the
University of Hawaii under my contract. Now,
here's a question that has three parts, but it's
really only one. As I recall, one of the deals that
Texas got was that they were going to devote a
substantial fraction of time on what became the
107-inch to planetary observing. But the 88-inch
at Hawaii, the 107-inch at... McDonald and the
IRTF were funded by NASA. And what fraction of time
do they have to give to NASA or planetary
observers? I don't remember the specific
fraction of time, but it was something on the order
of 30 percent of the time on the telescope had to be
made available for guest observers. that was
people that were not associated with the
institution that had the telescope. Now, it's
very important to say that the
approach used for both the 107-inch at Texas and
the 88-inch in Hawaii were quite different than
that used for the IRTF. In both the Texas and
smaller Hawaii telescope, We, NASA, provided
money to build the instrument, not the building
and not the dome. They were specifically excluded
in return for paying for the instrument and all
aspects of the instrument, although we couldn't
pay for the piers. That was part of the building.
But paying for the instrument plus assuring that
we would provide funding for the operation of the
telescope, it was agreed that a significant
amount of time on the telescope would be used for
planetary studies, and something on the order of
30 percent of the time would be made available to
observers from other institutions. We could not
take government money and give it to one
institution. They basically had to operate a
facility that was available part of the time for
other things.
I think it may be, and you'd have to check me on this,
but my memory says that the agreement was that they
would do planetary research for something like
30% of the time.
We would pay them something like 30% of the
operating cost of the telescope, plus providing
them with a telescope in the first place. And a
certain fraction of that 30% had to be used by
non-institution
people. In the case of the IRTF, that was, from the
start to the finish, a NASA instrument.
Instrument, building, dome, piers, all NASA.
100% NASA.
We paid the full operating cost of that telescope
and continue to do so.
But in return for operating it for us, The
University of Hawaii gets something like 25% of
the time on the telescope. The division of
observing time between planetary and
non-planetary, or let's say solar system and
non-solar system, if we include other things
other than just the planets now, is decided by NASA
in advance. And it has been something like 50-50.
But NASA reserves the right to increase or
decrease, as it wishes, the amount of time on solar
system observations, but it has to do so in
advance. Now, NASA is the sole funder of the IRTF,
with one exception, and that is that the National
Science Foundation said to NASA, If you say you're
going to operate this as a national facility,
which is what NASA is doing, we want you to provide
subsidies for the observers similar to those we
provide at Kitt Peak, Cerro Tololo, NRAO, et
cetera.
We said, fine. But much of the time is going to be
spent making observations that are not of
interest to NASA.
The NSF said, fine. We will provide the subsidy
funding for travel, things like this, for the time
not used for NASA programs, if you provide a
similar amount for NASA programs. So every year,
we get a small amount of money from NSF to provide
subsidy to the people working on programs not of
interest to NASA.
OK. Let me change the subject here and ask you
something that's purely an opinion. Back in the
turn of the century, Planetarius Romulus
respectable subject. By 1930 it was not popular,
in fact even dangerous to be in, according to
people like Fred Whipple. What do you think killed
it?
I think the thing that killed it was the fact that we
had just about reached the limit of what could be
done with the instrumentation that was available
back at the turn of the century.
We had got just about every piece of information we
could except for just continuing looking at
changing in surface appearance of the planets and
things like this. What happened to change it was
that when planetary astronomy went out of favor,
instrumentation development was still taking
place. And very few people use these new
developments to look at the planets. And in fact,
when I came on board in 64, We were still trying to
get people to use basically standard techniques
for stellar astronomy.